Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor David Cooper. He's Emeritus
professor of philosophy at Durham University, and today we're
talking about his book, Pessimism, Quiettism, and Nature as
Refuge. So, Doctor Cooper, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Right, Paul, thank you very much for, for having
me on your show.
OK, so let me ask you first, what is
misanthropy?
Well, I think one needs to distinguish vernacular everyday
senses of misanthropy from, as it were, philosophical misanthropy.
I mean, I take it that in the, Everyday
sense misanthropy is something like hatred of people or
Scrooge-like meanness. Um, I take philosophical, uh, misanthropy to
essentially be a, a, a, a negative judgment. On
the human condition. Um, THE claim that human life
is, is saturated with failings and vices like hypocrisy,
cruelty, greed, vanity, uh, and so on. And I
think it's perhaps worth adding that I think the
philosophical misanthrope's target is individual people. It's not a
claim about you or me being particularly awful. It's
a claim about something rather more abstract, the human
condition, the human form of life, human existence as
we now know it, something like that.
Um, AND what is a pessimism?
Pessimism. Um, WELL, again, I think one needs to
distinguish sort of everyday senses of the term from
its use in philosophical literature. And I take it
that in everyday discourse, a pessimist is somebody who,
I don't know, feels that things are going to
keep turning out badly. It's, it's gonna rain tomorrow
instead of being sunny, uh, during the, um, garden
party. Um Philosophical, um, um, pessimist, it seems to
me, is again making two judgments. Um, NEGATIVE judgments.
I mean, first, that the human condition is a,
a, a bad one in that suffering, unhappiness, anxiety,
frustration, and so on, um, greatly outweigh their opposites.
And the second negative judgment is that, um, you
know, it's just very unlikely that this condition can
be substantially or, or radically improved.
And how does pessimism then combine with misanthropy, and
is there a specific kind of misanthropy that results
from pessimism?
Well, I certainly don't think that pessimism and misanthropy,
um, entail one another. You, you can be a
pessimist without being a misanthrope, for example, um, Um,
you may think that our condition is, is a
very bad one. We suffer a lot, but this
isn't our fault. I mean, it's, it's just bad
luck or, uh, it's the machinations of the devil
or, or whatever. Again, you could be, um, a
misanthrope without being a pessimist. Um, YOU might think
that we're indeed pretty morally awful, but that salvation
is around the corner. Uh, THE communist revolution or
the second coming of Christ or whatever, and everything
will be fine. But you know, generally, it seems
to me that pessimism and misanthropy are mutually supporting.
Um, I mean, if, if, if the pessimist, um,
Yeah. If the pessimist is right and life is
largely suffering, Um, then this is liable to exacerbate
the very failings and vices that the misanthrope identifies.
And then conversely, if we're so full of failings
and vices as the misanthrope claims, uh then we
don't have the moral resources uh to really improve
the human condition. Um, SO it's plausible, I think,
to think that they're, they're going to go together
in a, a mutually supportive way. Um, AND then,
sorry, the second half of your question was, uh,
I mean, I think that you've ended up already
answering it at least in part, it was if
there's a specific kind of misanthropy that results from
pessimism.
Yes, I mean, I mean, I certainly think that
the, the, the, the, the kind, the basis of
your pessimistic view. Uh, IS going to affect the
form that your misanthropy takes. I mean, for example,
um, a very important example, um, it seems to
me that for the Buddha and for Schopenhauer, for
example, um, our condition of suffering is, is, is
primarily the product of our being creatures of, as
it were, insatiable desires. And it's these desires in
the form of greed, overweening ambition, jealousy, and so
on, uh, that are going to be at the
root of our failings and vices on, on one
version of misanthropy.
Right, and how would you characterize the human condition?
Well, I think in the way that the pessimist
and the misanthrope do. I mean that, um, you
know, on balance, our condition is an unhappy one,
that is both fed by and feeds into humankind's
very deeply entrenched failures and vices, um.
Uh, AND do you think it's really impossible to
ameliorate the human condition?
Well, yes, I'm afraid I do in any kind
of really substantial radical way. And that's because as
I see it, the, you know, our failings are
really very deeply entrenched. They're not the product of
passing social, political, or economic conditions that, that might
be reformed. I mean, if the human condition is
radically to improve, it seems to me that in
effect, it will no longer be the human condition
at all. It would be the condition of creatures
like us in some ways, but no longer with
our structures of desires, ambitions, and sort of self-obsession.
Mhm.
Yes, I was asking you that because there is
a specific kind of misanthrope, that is the activist
misanthrope who at least to a certain extent, believes
that we can ameliorate humankind. Correct.
Yeah, um, well, I, I mean, my reply, I
think is that, you know, the amelioration is going
to be very limited. I mean, of course, one
can and indeed should intervene. With modesty, I think,
and usually locally and on a small scale, intervene
to improve people's lives, and perhaps to help redress
some of their failings, but I do think it's
unrealistic. To suppose that can be any grand scale
amelioration of the human condition as dreamt of by
uh communist revolutionaries, various kinds of theocrats, and so
on. I mean, the, the evidence of history is
not supportive, I think of such huge large scale,
as it were utopian uh ambitions. They seem to
me to lack realism. Uh, THEY also, I think,
just ignore, you know, the, the really basic elements
and aspects of human suffering, which I don't think
are going to be changed by political, economic revolutions.
I mean, the pains and anxieties and suffering of
old age, of various kinds of addictions, and so
on. No, sorry, no,
yeah, go, go, go ahead, sorry.
No, so, so, so I was just gonna sort
of briefly sum up and say that I think
the prospects for big cause activism, uh, are limited.
There's a lack of realism here. Mhm.
And how should one respond to one's negative assessment
of the human condition? I mean, what should we
do?
Well, I think, you know, unless you take to,
to drinking or, or drugs or whatever to blot
out and forget your, your negative assessment of the
human condition. Um, YOU know, this assessment is bound
to produce, I think what I call in the
book disquiet, um, perhaps depression, even despair, frustration, and
so on. And that's an unhappy state to be
in. Uh, SO one should ask oneself, you know,
how one might live. In order to accommodate or
perhaps mitigate such disquiet, whether by say dropping out,
through militant activism or, or what, um, Um, And
you know, my answer is that uh one should
respond to one's assessment of the condition through a
certain, as it were, quietistic style of life and
attitude.
OK, but uh, what is quietism then and philosophical
quietism more specifically?
Well, I think, you know, the term quietism has
been used to refer to a number of different
As it were attitudes or or or styles of
life, um. But I think probably what all of
these have in common is something like the, the
following features. First, I think a, a kind of
realistic acceptance of things. Accompanied therefore by a kind
of humility or modesty, uh concerning your prospects or
capacity, uh radically to change things. And this accompanied
with a kind of prising of tranquility, equanimity, and
various, one might call them quiet virtues like patience
and, and care. I, I think, um, you know,
those features are probably common to, What one Regards
the quietest approach to things. Um, PHILOSOPHICAL quietism, and
I think the term's a bit ambiguous. Um. If
you Google philosophical quietism, you get an account of
the philosophy of the later Wittgenstein. Uh, BECAUSE, um,
you know, I think in the 1990s, the term,
um, um, Wittgensteinian quietism was coined to refer to
a certain, as it were style of philosophizing associated
allegedly with the later Wittgenstein. So, you know, on,
on, on, on this view, um, the job of
philosophy is not to answer questions by producing theories.
Uh, IT'S to recognize that the questions are in
some sense unreal. That they're, you only ask them
because you're confused. And that therefore the philosopher's job
is to dissolve these questions and with that dissolution
comes, as it were, a certain tranquility. It, it
brings peace, as Wittgenstein put it. I think very
important too, while we're on Wittgenstein is, you know,
another strand in his thinking, very apparent in his
book on Certainty, um, and this is the idea
that there's a lot of things we just have
to accept. We can't question them because they're the
very basis for anything that we can question and
think about. So you can't sensibly question, for example,
the claim that um, The world's existed for more
than 5 minutes, because you know that the world
has existed for more than 5 minutes, is, is
presupposed by just about everything we think and talk
about. But I think philosophical quietism, um, you know,
can mean things other than, uh, Wittgen Stein, an
approach to philosophy. Um, I mean, for example, um,
You have the idea, say, amongst the Epicureans. That
philosophy is a very important part of. The quietest
life. You should live quietistically, very modestly, without too
many ambitions. But part and parcel of that involves
philosophical reflection. For example, philosophical reflection will show you
that death is not very important, and that helps
you live um more tranquilly and. Um, SO yeah.
So they they're these senses of, I think, philosophical
quietism.
Right, and tell us about how it draws from
Buddhist and Taoist ideas as well as those from
Western philosophy.
Right, I, I mean, I think that the ideas
I take or borrow from Buddhism and Taoism are
actually very much shared by many ancient Western philosophers.
Epicurus, the Stoics, for example. Um, ALL of them,
for example, emphasize self-restraint, moderation, tranquility, and the like.
But yeah, I, I mean, I think there are
some ideas from Buddhism and Taoism respectively that very
characteristic of them that I draw on. And I
think from Buddhism, um, you know, I draw the
idea that generally we massively exaggerate the degree to
which we are, as it were masters of our
own lives, that we're self-governing. We ignore that is
ours, our susceptibility to chance, change, contingency. Um, FACTORS
outside of our control. I mean, I think the
famous Buddhist doctrine of not self, you know, is
really best understood as a denial that we're, as
it were, masters of ourselves. And this idea I
think promotes a certain humility and a reluctance to,
as it were, commit oneself too heavily to long-term
ambitions, because they're very likely to fail and result
in disappointment and suffering. Um, FROM Taoism, I, you
know, I take the, um, very central Taoist, um,
idea or indeed ideal of, um, you know, what
they call wuwei, which literally means I think not
doing. But of course, you know, Chuanger and other
Taoist sages, um, you know, they're not advocating that
we become couch potatoes and never do anything, just
sit around. Um, I mean, what they're advocating is
a certain style, I think, of acting. One that's
found amongst very skilled craftsmen, adept swimmers, good musicians.
And this is a kind of non-contending, non-rigid. Non-impositional
style of action, one that's supple, responsive, involves spontaneity,
maybe, you know, in modern terminology goes with the
flow, and I think this, this idea, we indicates
an important dimension, uh, of the quietest life.
Do you think that quietism can be a form
of egoism?
Well, I think it could be. I mean, you
know, I noted earlier, a rather pejorative sense of
quietism, where, you know, the quietest is somebody who's
just indifferent to everything except presumably, um, um, his
own well-being. Um, BUT I think the quietest of
the kind I've been describing, uh, you know, is
not at all an egoist. Um, THE quietest I've
been describing is concerned to avoid the failings and
vices identified by the misanthrope and to exercise various
virtues like humility, self-honesty, compassion. And It keen to
engage and as it was suitably modest local endeavors
to help other people, perhaps help them redress their
failings. You know, I mean, you know, the quietest
probably won't be found marching on a just stop
oil march. More likely to be cleaning up the
local river. And in so doing, it seems to
me contributing to um people's well-being rather more uh
than marching down the street. Um, AFTER all, you
know, you only have so many hours in the
day, and I think you can contribute more to
human well-being by cleaning up the local river, helping
your neighbor who's in trouble, volunteering for a local
animal charity. You can do considerably more that way
by waving flags on big cause demonstrations. Sorry I,
sorry, can I just say one little thing? I,
I do think it's a bad mistake. Uh, TO
think that because the question that the quietest asks.
That because that's a personal self-directed question, you know,
how can I best conduct my life? It's a,
it's a mistake to think that the answer to
that question has to be in terms of one's
personal self advantage at the expense of other people
and other creatures. That's just an error of logic,
I think.
Right, and what does quietism entail in terms of
how we live our lives? How should the quietest
live, uh, his life?
Well, I don't think the quietest advocates, you know,
in detail, any particular way you should live. He
doesn't, for example, tell you that you should go
in for this sort of career rather than that,
although there's probably some careers he'd advise you to
avoid. Um, I mean, what's advocated, I think, is
the kind of more general style of living and
attitude that I tried to describe a little earlier.
One thing I think that quietest authors sometimes, and
I think it's a good thing. Uh, DO, um,
is to, you know, point to exemplars, if you
like, moral exemplars. The Buddha, say, or the Taoist
sage or Montaign perhaps, and say, well, look, you
know, um, that's a pretty good life, it seems
to me, um, look at it and see what
you might be able to take from it and
incorporate into your own life.
So to refer to the title of your book,
what is a place of refuge?
Well, I use the word place here figuratively or,
or, or metaphorically, um. You know, Buddhists take refuge,
as it said, in the Buddha and his teachings
and the community of monks. Well, clearly that's not
a place. Um Um, AND I think even when
there is a literal physical place, a monastery, for
example, that you take refuge in, it's not the
physical place itself that's the refuge, but so to
speak, the kind of context it provides. And so
by a refuge, I mean something like, you know,
a context apart from, aside from the all too
human world of busyness, ambitions, prejudices, jealousies, and so
on. A context that offers some relief, temporarily at
least. Uh, FROM disquiet, as I called it.
About the idea of nature as refuge, why do
you suggest finding places of refuge in natural environments?
Well, I think if you look at the sort
of literature on, on refuge, um, there are many
possible places or contexts, uh, that get mentioned, for
example, music, art, hermit's cave, monasteries, and so on
can all be regarded as refuges from. The all
too human world, but I think the one that
is most frequently discussed, and that's one reason I
discuss it, is, you know, nature is refuge. And
it happens to be the one I think that
um. You know, resonates with me personally most, though
I think music probably comes a close second.
Why is nature a quote unquote, another place? What
is another place?
I think what I meant by this was something
like the following, um, as it were, the world
of nature is another place from the human world.
Because our understanding and experience of it isn't tied.
To the utility and functions that things have for
us. Which of course is the case, I think
in the human world of artifacts, buildings, and so
on. I mean, you know, just look around you
now, the laptop in front of you, a coffee
cup, perhaps, a carpet, uh, a window frame, you
know, all of these things are understood in terms
of utility and functions in relation to sort of
human aims and goals. Whereas it's not like that,
uh, with nature. We don't, when we are in
natural surroundings, experience everything as you know what Heidegger
called um equipment. Um, Um, MAYBE perhaps one could
add this too, I think there's perhaps another sense
in which people speak of nature as being other,
namely that it's, Nature for many people retains a
certain kind of sort of mystery and unfathomableness. It's
a place of wonder for many people. And that
makes it very different from the human world, I
think, which um doesn't attract, uh, uh, such attitudes.
I mean, I don't think. Things in the human
world are full of mystery, I mean I may
not understand how computers work, but, but I could
probably find out if I read up on it
and ask an expert, whereas I think the kind
of mystery that people associate with nature, Isn't of
that kind, you can't, you can't solve it by
uh reading up or asking some expert.
And what do we gain from refuging in nature?
What effects does it have on us?
Um, Well, I hope, um, this is the idea
that um that you gain relief. If only temporarily
from, from disquiet, a sense of emancipation or or
liberation from the all too human world. As well,
of course, as experiencing a great deal of um
um beauty, and if you like wonder. So, so
that's quite a lot, I think to get, um,
or gain. Um, I mean, I mean, also, it's
worth mentioning, um, I haven't thought about this one
too much, but there's now a huge literature on
and a big industry of, you know, nature therapy,
nature cures. Such as forest bathing or wild swimming.
Um, THERAPIES that are intended to promote benefits of,
um, health and, and wellness, uh, through engagement with
nature and, You know, I'm, I'm sure there are
such physical and mental health benefits, but I think
one's also got to be alert to certain dangers
in this therapeutic emphasis on turning to nature. It's
the danger, isn't it, of, as it were, turning
nature into a kind of commodity, um, as a
kind of outdoor gymnasium, and thereby bringing it into,
Uh, the world of equipment, you are as we're
now sucking the natural world into the very human
world, uh, from which you were, as it were,
seeking refuge. So I'm a bit ambivalent about at
least some forms of sort of nature therapy.
Can a refuge in nature only be sought by
individuals, or can society itself do it?
Well, I think there'd be something a bit strange
in the idea of a Of a society seeking
refuge in nature. Because I think that'd be sort
of, as it were, seeking refuge from itself. Um
um. What what I take it is possible, uh,
you know, communal and political. Initiatives to promote the
idea of And to provide opportunities for finding refuge
in nature, for example, protection of wild areas, support
for allotments, garden allotments in in cities, cleaning up
rivers and so on. But I suppose I would
add, being a pessimist, you know, just don't expect
too much here, and one fears that economic imperatives
are, are liable to prevail over even well-intentioned, uh,
political communal initiatives. Mhm
Do you think that the refuge in nature also
connect to a desire to preserve the natural world
from human activity?
Well, I think it'd be strange for someone who,
who, as it were, finds or at any rate
looks for refuge in nature, um, you know, to
be indifferent to say deforestation or loss of animal
habitats and so on. But I think it's an
important point to make here. I mean, I don't
think nature should be equated with wilderness. The natural.
Is around us or pretty close to us, uh
most of the time. I mean, even in cities,
uh, you know, you've got parks, gardens, allotments and
so on where natural processes, nature if you like,
is, uh, um, at work. And So while I
think, you know, the person seeking refuge in nature
is of course going to want to see wildness
preserved as well, um, I think he's also going
to be emphasized, look, you know, you can find
the natural going on all over the place. Uh,
YOU know, in your garden and so on and
focus perhaps on, on that. Not all of us
after all can afford, afford flights to, um, remote
parts of Alaska or somewhere. So, you know, get
as much as you can out of, you know.
Contact with nature in in in your local park.
Um.
Right, so I have one last question then. Do
you think that through quietism there's a risk of
falling into the feelings that lead to the very
same condition we are refuging from?
Uh, YES, I mean, I think. You wouldn't be
a good pessimist or misanthropist if you didn't think
there was such a risk, I think. Um, I
mean, there is the danger, I think, that The
ambitions, jealousies, vanities, and so on that permeate the
human world, the everyday world of human existence, that
these can, as it were, get transported uh into
people's dealings with nature. And I think one sees
this even in a small way with very competitive
bird watching, um, where one gets the feeling the
important thing is not the birds, but how many
you've seen and whether you win a prize. Or
ecotourism, I think a lot of eco-tourism may be
permeated by these kind of vices. So, you know,
who's seen the most lions on, on, uh, your
safari holiday, and how many hours did it take
you to climb Mount Kilimanjaro and, and so on.
Um, AND, it's just not easy, it seems to
me. Um, HOW could a pessimist or a misanthrope
think it was easy? It's not easy to leave
behind the, the failings that infect our everyday lives
when engaging with the natural world, um. After all,
it's worth mentioning, isn't it, that for unfortunately, for
a very large number of people, their favorite way
of engaging with nature is by uh um killing
things. Shooting, fishing, trapping, uh, whatever it happens to
be. Mhm.
OK, great. So the book is again Pessimism, Quietism,
and Nature as Refuge. I am leaving a link
to it in the description of the interview and
Doctor Cooper, thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
fascinating conversation.
Well, thank you very much indeed for all your
questions.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognun, Mahel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka, Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov, Zal
Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Eddin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan Scortez
or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Ebert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink,
Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers,
Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan, Kanis, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.